
Thread Pool
===========

A thread-pool is a collection of worker threads that efficiently execute
asynchronous callbacks on behalf of the application. The thread pool is
primarily used to reduce the number of application threads and provide
management of the worker threads.

The following applications can benefit from using a thread pool:

-  An application that is highly parallel and can dispatch numbers of
   small work items asynchronously (such as distributed index search or
   network I/O).

-  An application that creates and destroys numbers of threads that each
   run for a short time. Using the thread pool can reduce the complexity
   of thread management and the overhead involved in thread creation and
   destruction.

-  An application that processes independent work items in the
   background and in parallel (such as loading multiple tabs).

-  An application that must perform an exclusive wait on kernel objects
   or block on incoming events on an object. Using the thread pool can
   reduce the complexity of thread management and increase performance
   by reducing the number of context switches.

-  An application that creates custom waiter threads to wait on events.

Morn provide a thread-pool. It has the features bellow:

-  Task priority is supported.

-  Both fixed thread number and adjustable thread number are available.

-  simple API

.. _header-n49:

API
---

.. _header-n50:

Thread Pool
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: c

   void mThreadPool(void (*func)(void *));
   void mThreadPool(void (*func)(void *),void *para);
   void mThreadPool(void (*func)(void *),void *para,int *flag);
   void mThreadPool(void (*func)(void *),void *para,int *flag,float priority);

It is used to throw a function to the thread pool.

``func`` is the function pointer. If the form of ``func`` is:

.. code:: c

   void func(void *para);

The ``para`` must be provided.

And if：

.. code:: c

   void func();

No ``para`` is needed.

.. note:: 

   If function need more than 1 parameters, you must make all the
   parameters as a struct, and set ``para`` as the struct pointer.

When the function throwed to thread-pool has return, the\ ``flag`` will
be set as 1, otherwise, ``flag`` will be set 0. If the state of function
is careless, ``flag`` is not necessary, or can be set NULL.

``priority`` is provided to thread pool scheduler, to decide which
function run first. A smaller value indicates a higher priority. DFLT
priority is 0 (the highest priority).

.. note:: 

   Functions have the same priority will run by order of ``mThreadPool``.

   A higher priority means the function can jump to front of queue, but other running functions will not be affected.


Property
~~~~~~~~

In Morn we use ``mPropertyWrite`` to set module property and read it
using ``mPropertyRead``.

Here, ``ThreadPool`` is the module name.

-  **thread_num：**

.. code:: c

   //set thread number as 10
   int n_thread=10;
   mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_num",&n_thread,sizeof(int));

``thread_num`` is the number of worker threads, it can be set when:

1. before using thread pool.

2. adjust thread number when business scenarios changes.

If this property not set, the pool will use the default threads number,
which is equal to CPU number.

-  **thread_adjust**

-  **thread_max**

.. code:: c

   //enable thread number adjust, and set maximum thread number as 16
   int adjust_valid = 1;
   int max_thread = 16;
   mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_adjust",&adjust_valid,sizeof(int));
   mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_max",&max_thread,sizeof(int));

Usually, we should decide whether thread number is adjustable before
using the pool. and set ``thread_adjust`` true if necessary.
``thread_adjust`` is disable, if no property set.

If ``thread_adjust`` is enable, ``thread_max`` will be needed. It
represent the maximum worker threads number can be adjusted in the pool.
In other word, pool can adjust from 2 to ``thread_max`` threads. if
``thread_max`` not set, the default value is ``2*thread_num``.

-  **exit**

.. code:: c

   mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","exit“);

Thread pool will close and be released before the end of program, and
``exit`` is not necessary.

Write ``exit`` when you want to brought an early end.

.. note:: 

   Write ``exit`` will block until all functions in pool return.

example
-------

As an example, we run the functions below in the thread pool. which is
used to convert case of characters in string.

.. code:: c

   void func(char *str)
   {
       printf("Thread %d input : %s\n",mThreadID(),str);
       for(char *p=str;*p;p++)
       {
                if((*p>='a')&&(*p<='z')) *p+=('A'-'a');
           else if((*p>='A')&&(*p<='Z')) *p+=('a'-'A');
       }
       mSleep(mRand(0,100));
       printf("Thread %d output: %s\n",mThreadID(),str);
   }

Getting Start
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: c

   #include "morn_ptc.h"
   int main()
   {
       char data[64];
       for(int i=0;i<100;i++)
       {
           mRandString(data,32,64);    //generate a string with size from 32 to 64
           mThreadPool(func,data);     //throw it to thread pool
           mSleep(mRand(0,40));        //sleep for a random time
       }
       printf("finish\n");
   }

Here we generate a random string, and then convert character case in
worker thread.

Output is:

.. code:: 

   Thread 1 input : F4SII41yLXswZJgcpvV5Z4fx5aOHVbaJGTbGndIwalIy
   Thread 2 input : GUswOOtu5fFLJLIUm9BXVoxDJ4JBhTScqmHbt3IJayrqX0jN5rkc
   Thread 1 output: f4sii41YlxSWzjGCPVv5z4FX5AohvBAjgtBgNDiWALiY
   Thread 1 input : O8j2snOeGyVlSuAvfehMtBeJTi49nFBBcOIOXqcrOTE7k
   Thread 2 output: guSWooTU5FfljliuM9bxvOXdj4jbHtsCQMhBT3ijAYRQx0Jn5RKC
   Thread 3 input : 3yMFJtP7sAKvMqrPpCCf904CG2qyp1j1NY1DILcUSofBeiKE0imcivb1ezf8SCK
   Thread 2 input : HmYUPUHqEgCWVkoAsCmVwgBCwaTDUyDfnBv0jchGJ7PJV28Y8j4IJlPyPpQeLC
   Thread 4 input : wiA6sVNueo0nuifKiIbfZxWtSwxdLqAH0UwNE1BnewqFyCkE
   Thread 3 output: 3YmfjTp7SakVmQRpPccF904cg2QYP1J1ny1dilCusOFbEIke0IMCIVB1EZF8sck
   Thread 1 output: o8J2SNoEgYvLsUaVFEHmTbEjtI49NfbbCoioxQCRote7K
   Thread 3 input : 2zKCrYqSZA4tErDbeAsYj2bjqiz3i9kS1G7O5TA6id4rodCb3t3lQVV
   Thread 4 output: WIa6SvnUEO0NUIFkIiBFzXwTsWXDlQah0uWne1bNEWQfYcKe
   ...
   Thread 2 input : J0F9euYmKG2UmswTsTUIHAQ5cVBDoolRO0Nl2cQrmOIihh
   Thread 1 output: TWYsvYosDXcnD2iQlrcvB7EW4X1BImDUaLwedYaNXF7UJ
   Thread 1 input : cI46qeRbI2rnPRKS4hJIBck26xM4sntqbpoyKoqSHYvLRybZwR1giQv9b
   Thread 4 output: v1HvYRXW8160skf90G3dzvlFkZjsFODJgzayv6A1d7a4ooCwLPbmgWVBQZB06
   finish
   Thread 3 input : DS9waYspnJwNy8WSIhCageINcQdk2Q49ta6fRBPS2GhB
   Thread 3 output: ds9WAySPNjWnY8wsiHcAGEinCqDK2q49TA6Frbps2gHb
   Thread 2 output: j0f9EUyMkg2uMSWtStuihaq5CvbdOOLro0nL2CqRMoiIHH
   Thread 1 output: Ci46QErBi2RNprks4HjibCK26Xm4SNTQBPOYkOQshyVlrYBzWr1GIqV9B

In the program above, we used a default threads number, and disable
thread-number adjust. It can be seen that:

1. For this computer, default thread-number is 4.

2. functions run in different worker thread independently.

3. Main function will return until all sub-thread returns.

Property Set
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: c

   int main()
   {
       char data[100][64];
   
       int thread_num =2;
       mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_num",&thread_num,sizeof(int));
       int thread_adjust=1;
       mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_adjust",&thread_adjust,sizeof(int));
       int thread_max = 6;
       mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","thread_max",&thread_max,sizeof(int));
   
       mPropertyRead("ThreadPool","thread_num",&thread_num);
       printf("thread_num=%d\n",thread_num);
       
       for(int i=0;i<100;i++)
       {
           mRandString(&data[i][0],32,64);
           mThreadPool(func,&data[i][0]);
           mSleep(mRand(0,20));
       }
       mPropertyRead("ThreadPool","thread_num",&thread_num);
       mPropertyWrite("ThreadPool","exit");
       
       printf("thread_num=%d\n",thread_num);
       printf("finish\n");
   }

Here, the function do the same thing with example above. But we initiate
the threads number as 2, enable thread adjust, and set the maximum
threads number as 6.

Output is:

.. code:: 

   thread_num=2
   Thread 1 input : 80uB1yrBuLnFN3MR0h9ySs0AQody0fxRBqkaagtum1LPeeb
   Thread 2 input : 4C0hQiwgeJbkqx8lu3TQGd31h9n5SapZJkREnYRFgHJ5j1GyEOoqgKzEBZa
   Thread 1 output: 80Ub1YRbUlNfn3mr0H9YsS0aqODY0FXrbQKAAGTUM1lpEEB
   Thread 1 input : UhY07j5tnc48WnmIaC6XzXEneOzDZdY4zYXewIvRUZ5Y1t9M
   Thread 2 output: 4c0HqIWGEjBKQX8LU3tqgD31H9N5sAPzjKreNyrfGhj5J1gYeoOQGkZebzA
   Thread 2 input : 05yzIbKvK5ALwSVwZTTaMFtd2zN8mtIblIdV6auiNg2dpgCUkVRu8LVJl
   Thread 1 output: uHy07J5TNC48wNMiAc6xZxeNEoZdzDy4ZyxEWiVruz5y1T9m
   Thread 1 input : DJ64NX9ipOa8ms1RdpEoyhXO8eSeVysHWsNXEdMk7DMkI7Qh5BlwOQCl
   Thread 2 output: 05YZiBkVk5alWsvWzttAmfTD2Zn8MTiBLiDv6AUInG2DPGcuKvrU8lvjL
   ...
   Thread 4 input : fniLHTWO4SvLxtuYb3icO13JXtNrwrZG4JtkEQmDYttos4M3zKokmuI8hk6rs
   Thread 2 output: 9HDk178o3iicTYJ8BcQF5Oj5BZmeWK0mf9EgSl0T77O7qcEfEWVCwfeMOS
   Thread 1 input : QXDRHvQ9NYB6juFEimjIVkGdiVsxe4LPJBA8qFEFWEG0ULV8aBDqJFRVcAj
   Thread 3 input : LulSuJopDZlPod9hsxUiab2MQKqohzh4YA3SouzQm1
   Thread 1 output: qxdrhVq9nyb6JUfeIMJivKgDIvSXE4lpjba8Qfefweg0ulv8AbdQjfrvCaJ
   Thread 2 input : NtVVJ4ORIfurmsPYewRA6TBuNp3LnpchhmCGNAM3Dezre7YaZKyk
   Thread 2 output: nTvvj4oriFURMSpyEWra6tbUnP3lNPCHHMcgnam3dEZRE7yAzkYK
   Thread 1 input : MsuP6AcH0duATFk5WI4NtOXLNJlwdTYKsDvdRskscemvgmA21MYMLqAr
   Thread 4 output: FNIlhtwo4sVlXTUyB3ICo13jxTnRWRzg4jTKeqMdyTTOS4m3ZkOKMUi8HK6RS
   Thread 3 output: lULsUjOPdzLpOD9HSXuIAB2mqkQOHZH4ya3sOUZqM1
   Thread 1 output: mSUp6aCh0DUatfK5wi4nToxlnjLWDtykSdVDrSKSCEMVGMa21mymlQaR
   thread_num=4
   finish

It can be seen that:

1. thread-number of the pool adjusted from 2 to 4.

2. it blocks when write ``exit`` to the pool.
